We're in the office of the Austin Department of
Planning and Growth Management, and I'm
interviewing Luther Polnau, P-O-L-N-A-U. And
Luther is the principal planner with the
department. And Luther, how long have you been
with this department? this department since it
began in 84 with the city since I was a student at the
university in 1966. Here in Austin University?
That's right. I see. And what were your studies at
UT? Architecture and graduate school.
What I'd like to concentrate on First, this
afternoon, Luther, is the period of transition
between the Austin Tomorrow Plan project and the
current Austin Plan project and the
reorganization of the planning function in
Austin. And the last contact we had was with Dick
Lilly prior to any discussions of reorganization
of the planning functions. And the Austin
Tomorrow Plan had been readied for publication,
but had not actually been published yet. At the
time that you interviewed Dick? Exactly.
So the plan was published in 1980. Then it must have
been 79. That's a long period to cover. You can do
it.
Well, let's see. In what way are you interested in
what the city was doing with planning or what the
department was doing? What the... How the
reorganization occurred. What led to the
reorganization of the planning department? Who
initiated that? I think there was probably...
some difficulty in enforcing the Awesome
Tomorrow Competence Plan and interpreting it and
seeing that it
was very broad and it could be interpreted in very
many ways. And there were a lot of folks in town who
probably felt that it should not be implemented or
should not be followed very strictly, that there
should be some other planning procedures that, if
it were strictly interpreted, I suppose there was
a feeling that it was too restrictive, the growth
corridor concept in particular. As a matter of
fact, it was not long after the plan was adopted
that the council approved Motorola's plant out in
the Oak Hill area, a location that was really
contrary to the desires of the plan. Did the
council adopt the plan? Yes, it was adopted. It was
adopted, but the plan, as most plans in Texas, are
advisory. This plan was advisory. There's no
requirement that it be followed. The change, I
suppose, in... the way the department was
organized came
through both a, I guess, a perception that the
plan wasn't being followed in the private sector,
probably that it shouldn't be strictly adhered
to, that it was too restrictive, and by the same
token,
feeling that there
needed to be a change, more authority or more power
or more attention paid to master planning in terms
of the way the city was organized, the structure of
the department in particular. And there was a
group that put together a proposal for a new
planning department. What group was that? It was
called Metro Austin. I think the group is still in
existence. Is it a citizens group? Yes. Did that
come out of the groups of neighborhood councils
that had been working as a as a citizens' group with
the Austin Tomorrow Plan project? No, the Metro
Austin group was only primarily
business-oriented. I see. One of the reasons
that... The only criticism I had heard of the
Austin Tomorrow report, printed report, was that
it was a bit vague in the sense that it... didn't
have any map, any diagram of what the adoption of
policies would lead to in terms of location of
activities. It didn't have a land use plan. It did
have a map that identified priority development
areas. And
the The high growth area, the growth corridor, as
it was known, was delineated on a map. And that in
itself was a bit of a problem for
people to follow and to enforce. One of the, as I
understand it, one of the city councilmen
requested directly through the city manager at
that time that a planned diagram be formulated
that the council could receive and act on. Are you
aware of anything like that? What do you mean, a
plan diagram? A plan, a land use element for the
plan
drawn. I don't recall. I don't recall that. Okay.
I'd heard that, and I didn't know what the status of
that was. It
was secondhand information for me. Not that I'm
aware of. If
you look at it from this reorganization, the
restructuring of the planning
department from an internal perspective, it
seemed that The folks that were involved with
comprehensive planning were more involved in
supporting the zoning and subdivision planners.
Once the plan was adopted, Austin was on sort of a
growth spurt that began probably in the late 70s,
really picked up the rate of growth at three and
three and a half percent in the late 70s and began to
pick up to the point where by some people's account
in 84 and 85 was double digit annual growth rate.
That sort of spurt in development with a staff that
was smaller instead of larger resulted in
comprehensive planning section. The folks that
were supposed to be watching out for the master
plan really to be served more as support for
special studies for zoning and subdivision
activity. And one of the goals of the
reorganization was to sort of get comprehensive
planning back on track and give it some
importance. Restructuring the departments was
to have the planning and growth management
department perform that function as a separate
department
so that it would not be sucked into the day-to-day
planning activities. It's all too easy to do.
Yeah. And organizationally, the department was
to report directly to the manager. And
theoretically, at least at the time that it was
being structured, the thought was that that sort
of reporting structure would give the department
a bit of an edge over other departments in terms of
its role in coordinating the activities so that
there would be some coordination and mutual
supporting. Where do the other departments
report? The way it's actually working there are
assistant city managers that each of the
departments report to. So they certainly would
put planning then in a more or less coordinated
role. Theoretically. Potentially. Yeah. But as
it actually happened, I think planning is just
another, or planning and growth management is
another one of the departments that reports
directly to an assistant city
manager. So the reorganization, at least
ostensibly, was
to do that. Okay. What is the size of your staff now
in this particular department? Must be around 45.
Of
those, how many would you say were planners? The
other division is primarily the computer folks,
the land-based information system that's being
developed. Probably about...
folks over there, 13 folks, and we probably have
20, 20 times. That's about right. You have to look
at an organization chart to see exactly what it is.
Yeah.
Can you describe the general approach taken and
the organization that is available now for the
Austin Plan project and how this might differ from
the Austin Tomorrow work that was done under Dick
Lilly's administration?
The major difference is that the Austin Plan is...
enforceable not too long after the department was
reorganized got some new folks in from Florida
Florida is one of the states that has mandatory
planning required compliance as part of the state
law and Texas of course doesn't have that but as
home rule cities go home rule charters are fairly
And
shortly after the reorganization and bringing on
board these folks, there was a charter election
amendment to the charter that required the
adoption of a comprehensive plan, specified the
elements that are in that comprehensive plan, and
required compliance of all the city's action to
the comprehensive plan. What that really means is
that... We'll make sure to see what happens, but
what it means is that the council, or anyone else
for that matter, will have to... All the actions
that the city takes will have to be in conformance
with the comprehensive plan. What if the council
does what they did before with Motorola?
I suppose as any charter amendment or charter
violation,
I suppose a citizen can take the city to court or
whatever. I suppose that's the way charter
violations are dealt with. I would suspect that
that would be the case. But I think
the situation here is that There has to be a certain
amount of flexibility, and I think what we look at
in terms of what's going to happen here is the
comprehensive plan will allow some sort of
predictability and consistency in action, but
the plan can be amended, and it's intended that
there would be amendments so that we get, before
there is an action taken that is contrary to the
comprehensive plan, discussion about amendment
and its overall effect will occur. And it has a
couple advantages in that sense, in that... Yes.
If the city is faced with a decision about a
particular issue, the decision regarding that
issue, if it involves a plan amendment, will
require a more comprehensive view of the impact of
that particular issue or decision. And it will be
less subject, I think, ideally, to the sort of
incremental, narrow decisions that, at least
ideally, occurred in the past. Well, that would
mean then that the city, if, for example,
something like a Motorola situation presented
itself to the city in the future, then the city, if
it were in conflict with the adopted plan, then the
city would have to go through the hearing process
for revising the plan, which would bring it before
the public for discussion and so forth. And then
after readopting the plan in a new form, they'd
have to revise the zoning ordinance to
accommodate uh the changes in the comprehensive
plan right the other the other thing key to that is
not only
well i started to say not only are we going to have to
amend the master plan and go through that public
hearing process and see things in context but uh
interpretation of whether or not an issue or
decision is in conformance with the plan is going
to be a little bit more easy than it would have been
with the old Austin Tomorrow Plan. That plan was,
as you mentioned before, very general. There were
some internal conflicts in it so that you could
almost come up with any position on an issue and
find some statement in the plan that would support
that position. This plan, we're hoping, will have
a little less less broad dictates in it. It will
have a certain direction. Yeah, there will be a
land use element and a land use map, for instance.
And transportation? It'll have all the classic
components. Public facilities. Right. That's
very interesting to me as a kind of a
traditionalist in planning. We needn't go into
that. I'm not here to interview myself. But that's
quite a departure, because when I talked with Dick
Lilly about this at conferences and when he was a
guest at A&M in our department, I asked him why it
was that the Austin Tomorrow Project seemed to be
heading toward a policies document. rather than a
comprehensive plan. And he said, well, he wasn't
sure that the staff could put together a
comprehensive plan. And I thought he was kidding,
frankly. But I'm not so sure. It was to know. And
we'll have to see now what comes out of this new
project, because I would wonder about that
statement. I think that the staff here is quite
capable of putting together a comprehensive
plan. Yeah, I would think so too, probably.
But at that time, of course, policy plans were very
fashionable then. Everybody had to have a policy
plan. If you didn't have a policy plan, you weren't
on the cutting edge of planning. Yeah, that's
where the limelight... Yes, and it was almost sort
of a plan for planners in a sense, because that's
what you come out with. If there is any glory in
planning, that's what planners are looking for,
the glory or sort of innovative approaches. I
think there is a cost to that sort of thing that you
take for granted the very basics, the foundation
of planning, and try to get to something better,
something...
something
perhaps
more exciting or something broader or whatever,
you lose the very basic requirements of
coordinating facilities, of making sure the
various arms of the city are working in concert,
and that it does do the things that it's supposed to
for the private sector and for the public sector.
that we may be on sort of a pendulum and be going back
to that too far. I don't know, but I think it was
missing in the past, in the recent past. It was
interesting because the same thing happened in
Oakland, California. They were putting together
a document that had a long list of goals,
objectives, and policies, but no planned
diagrams. for either circulation or land use or
public utilities. And they were directed by the
city council to complete their work and to
indicate what the consequences would be
geographically of adopting that set of goals,
objectives, and policies. So they had to go back to
the drafting board again to do that. And here, that
didn't happen. What did happen, it seems to me, and
correct me if I'm wrong, It meant that the whole
department was reorganized and that, as you
pointed out, it was reorganized essentially to
clarify the essential differences between
current planning on a day-to-day basis and
long-range comprehensive planning so that
long-range comprehensive planning wouldn't be
drained a way to do the day-to-day tasks that
should be handled elsewhere. That's the
reorganization. The reorganization also was
sort of a vehicle, a tool, for doing a new
comprehensive plan, which was needed also.
Because we had a comprehensive plan and We did not
implement it. We had several failed bond
elections that resulted in our not being able to
extend utilities in the areas that were called for
in the comprehensive plan. Private developers,
there was a period of several years in the early 80s
where the utilities that were extended were
extended through our municipal utility
districts.
The districts were created wherever the land
could be had regardless of where the
comprehensive plan called for development to
occur. By the time 8384 came about, we found
ourselves having more development commitments
without any regard to the comprehensive plan
development commitments on the part of the
private sector. on the part of the city and having
to respond to where the need was. And we were in a
situation where we had a comprehensive plan that
was totally contrary to what was going on, what had
occurred. the need for the city to respond and take
stock of itself. I know that Lily was very upset
about the proliferation of muds and what that was
doing to frustrate the plan. And then shortly
after he commented on this at some APA meetings,
Kent Butler published his paper in the Implanting
Magazine.
which was quite a good paper, I thought. Yeah, it
was a strange time because we found the city was
growing by leaps and bounds, population
development, but the city itself was not able to
respond because of the failed bond elections. The
private sector found a way to do it, and in finding a
way to do it, not only made things in a way simpler
for them, they didn't have to comply with the
comprehensive plan, practically speaking, but
they also, through MUDS, there's sort of a market
advantage because of the financial, the
financing advantages to the developer and MUDS.
It was a necessity at first to put together MUDS,
and it became a desirable way to develop later on.
They could take an end run around the city that way.
Essentially.
But, I
don't know, the city... The city began to use the
contractual agreements with the MUDs to get some
concessions out of the private sector in terms of
specific land use requirements, public
facilities that were donated, that sort of thing.
So gradually, there began to be a trade-off also.
And I think development standards for streets I
think we got some pretty good deals out of that.
Okay, now that that phase is over and you're into a
new phase of planning for Austin, and this, by the
way, is one of many comprehensive plans that have
been prepared for Austin, starting with, I think,
the first one done by Hal Wise right after the
Second World War. Well, 1928 was actually the
first one. Kockenfeller. Kockenfeller in 1928. I
wonder if there are any copies of that document
that one could photocopy or refer to. There
probably are in the Austin Travis County
Collection in the History Center. They won't let
me into the stacks. to do research. I have to go
through the current catalog. Let me just... I was
starting to say that there seemed to be a very
strong position on the part of the business and
development community, because Austin was
growing such leaps and bounds, that the Austin
Tomorrow comprehensive plan was stifling, was no
growth sort of plan,
and there was a strong move to
have another plan or to growth corridors. Some of
the terms that were used in the Austin Tomorrow
Plan were dirty words. And there was a strong
feeling that we needed to have another plan or not
use that plan. There was a push to have a land use map
or land use element developed as part of an
amendment to the Austin Tomorrow Plan. Some way to
get out of what at least a fairly large segment of
the community, the business community anyway,
felt was too confining a growth border concept.
unrealistic, no growth concept at the time that
Austin was growing so fast. And this was largely by
the business community? Yes.
Business, developers, builders, that
growth-related community. So as a consequence
now, the new approach to the Austin Plan, I gather,
has acknowledged those feelings on the part of the
community, business community and others, and
has moved ahead with what I would term a classical
approach toward a comprehensive plan, namely a
plan that's composed of three essential elements
of land use, transportation, and public
facilities. more elements in that. There are 10 or
12 elements, but it is of that ilk, yes.
And I think the notion here is One that is not so
rigid in terms of defining a growth border, an area
where we should grow in terms of a guiding concept
of a plan, but of a land use element that
coordinates the basic utility services and roads
and that sort of thing. The environmental
constraints that were paramount in the Austin
Tomorrow Plan are certainly recognized in this
plan, but I think
there's probably a broader recognition of
engineering or design mitigation to deal with the
environmental concerns, and not so much of what
was perceived at the time no development outside
the growth corridor. And although that was not the
intent or the way the plan was to work, that's the
popular interpretation of it. You had definite no
development zones. That was the perception that
the public had. That's the perception. That's not
what the plan called for, but got a dirty name
because of that. OK.
I'll ask Norman about timing. But I wanted to ask
you what other elements are considered for the
awesome plan project now, in addition to the three
basics?
OK, you mentioned the transportation, land use,
public facilities. There's public services
also, and public buildings as well. Environment,
economics, economic development, housing,
health and social services.
cultural affairs, urban design. I'm sure I left
out one or two, but well, OK. Question on your
transportation element. Austin has been going
through the agonies of debate over its airport for
about 20 years to my knowledge. And before that, I
don't know. Is the Austin plan going to solve that
problem?
I doubt it. There's an airport commission that's
seated right now, and I think you may have to ask
Norm how this goes, but my perception of what would
happen with this is that there are probably some
key
players, key...
factors involved that would be dealt with by the
airport commission city council participants in
the transportation as well as the land use
component of this plan that all be involved
together But
I think the airport issue is a political issue.
It's not necessarily a planning issue. I think
there have been plenty of reports that say the area
that it's in right now is such that it can't
reasonably be expanded without paying a hell of a
price on existing housing and development. If you
look at it from that position, I think it needs to be
moved somewhere. But that's an opinion. On
circulation, the officials at Texas A&M from the
top on down are very concerned about the lack of
good highway facilities between College Station
and Austin. And they are working very closely with
the State Division of Highways and
Transportation to upgrade circulation between
the two, largely because of the two universities.
are you going to be proposing in the Austin plan for
any new major links between College Station and
Austin? For example, particularly, let me point
out that the only two ways in and out of Austin now
from the east are going either north to the north
end of the city or the south end of the city. There's
nothing that goes right into the middle of the city
that I'm aware of. Not as a major road. Those are the
only two state highways that exist throughout
Dallas. Any of the others are just county roads.
I'm not aware of anything. We have, I suppose,
Austin Transportation Study.
And... The major
interest right now, I think, is north-south, and
most recently an alternative to I-35 to San
Antonio.
You're at capacity now on 35, aren't you? Yes,
there's talk about double-decking beyond what we
already have. Double-decking the
double-decker? No, extending the double-deck.
Extending it. Yes, on the way out to Bend White in
the south.
They're in the process now of widening the
northern portion.
Okay, is there anything else you'd like to comment
on? with regard to the project.
No? OK. I can't think of anything. Thank you very
much. OK.
Good afternoon. This is the 21st of November,
1986. We're in the office of Norman Standoffer,
the planning director. for the Department of
Planning and Growth Management of the city of
Austin. And Norman, I'd like to start out by asking
you, what were the influences on your life as a
planner that brought you from Florida, where you
were, to Austin, Texas?
I'm dying of smoking.
I guess at the time I considered coming to Austin,
I was extremely skeptical of coming back to this
part of the world. because I didn't really believe
there was much to be done for planting in the
Southwest. You say coming back, you were here...
Well, I wasn't in Texas, but I was in Oklahoma for a
good deal of my career before I went to Florida. I
equate the great Southwest as the desert for
planting. I always did during my career because it
just wasn't part of the mandatory planting
movement. It
wasn't much innovative, in my opinion,
professionally happening. at least not what I was
looking for. I felt my career and my view of
planning
really matured after spending nearly 10, 12 years
in Oklahoma. Where were you in Oklahoma? I was in
Oklahoma City, basically, in central Oklahoma. I
went to the university, got my master's degree,
came out of school in the mid-60s. Weren't a lot of
planners around in those days in Oklahoma. Became
a planning director as my first job in a little
suburban community of Central Oklahoma, Midwest
City. And as many people did in those days, you ran a
one-man, you know, planning and zoning shop. And
basically stayed around Central Oklahoma, moved
to Oklahoma City as assistant director and
eventually as director.
I finally got to the midlife crisis of the early 40s
and tried to figure out what I was going to do with my
life. I had accomplished significant things I
thought were mine in Oklahoma City and was at the
crossroads of what I wanted to do with my life. And I
started my own consulting firm.
Got into rehabilitation of old Victorian homes
and that kind of thing, thinking I was going to find
a solution to renovation of the inner city by
myself. In Oklahoma City. Yeah. Went through the
epic problems of the first time interest rates
went from 10% to 14%, and that ended that venture.
Went to South Florida and really learned what
planning was all about. I spent nearly five years
in Broward County, Florida, which is well
documented as one of the fastest growth urban
areas in the United States. It grew from 85,000
people in 1950 to over a million in 1980. And it was
just a phenomenal urban laboratory.
It was a very innovative place to do planning. in
terms of it was the first governmental unit in the
state of Florida to adopt in its charter,
interestingly enough, a mandatory planning
charter. It came out of a grassroots charter
movement of the people of the area and followed two
years later by the Florida Mandatory Planning
Act.
It was a unique kind of intergovernmental system.
It wasn't like Metro Dade or Nashville Davidson in
its charter, but it was metropolitan in its
planning and regulation, but not in other service
provisions of government. It was a good start.
Yeah, and it was a very interesting challenge. I
got to Broward at the time the plan had been
completed. Was that an in-house job? No, they had
used consultants, but largely in-house. And they
had been wrestling for a couple of years over the
implementation and regulatory streamlining
part of making it function. And I got the job of
writing the Broward County Land Development
Code, which was the tool and the vehicle that
implemented the plan. And that thing That
process, that entity, and the resulting
litigations that came about with some of our
innovations and impact fees and things like that
were just, to me, were the top of my professional
career. And I was at the point, having put that to
bed and had it working real well, Jim Duncan
sitting there as one of my principal deputies
running the thing, it just worked like a dream and
There wasn't any more challenge. And all of a
sudden, we were up at the conference. I can't
remember where the conference was. Northeast
somewhere, when we saw and heard the rumblings
about the... Austin? Austin, and everybody
started figuring out what was going on in Austin.
Jim Duncan had told me about Austin all his life
because Jim had been from here originally. Went to
UT, worked here as a planning intern, that kind of
thing. They said all his life, if he ever got the
opportunity, there's only one place he'd want to
settle, and that's Austin, Texas. And he got real
interested, because at the same time they
advertised his job that he took, they advertised
this job. They broke Dick's department into two
departments. And it was just so phenomenal that
the two job ads were tailor-made. He's regulatory
day to day zoning nuts and bolts. That's his forte,
planning and automation, which were the the
issues that they were building around this
department and what we've done here were my forte.
It was just, you know, it's like, we're the people
so we applied I was a little less skeptical of it
because I was my ingrained attitudes about
Leaving a mandatory planning state, a state where
the legislation, the litigation, and the
momentum for planning were so perfect. I just
consider that the greatest planning environment
in the world. But I was 45-plus years old. I felt I
had capped my career. And I said, the only other
thing I want to do in the public sector is make it
work in a non-mandatory planning state. Well,
when we came through the interview process down
here with the city manager, they were really
talking about the possibilities of stretching
the limits with Austin. And we learned about the
problems of Austin and the polarities and the
pro-growth, no-growth and the dramatic problems
they were having here. But the interest in the then
city council and the manager in perhaps trying to
do something through our Home Rule Charter. Who
was the city manager then? It was Jorge Carrasco,
the current city manager. He was, I see. He had just
been appointed six or eight months before that.
And who was the manager before him? That was when
Dick Ernie was here.
Gosh, it slips my mind. Wasn't Dan Davidson
another fellow right after that? Well, there was
somebody between Davidson and Carrasco. Yes. I
can't recall his name.
But knowing the strong home rule power of Texas
City, well, there's always that possibility that
you can set a mandatory context in our home rule
charter. I've talked with my friends and peers
back here for years. APA chapter wants to go get the
state legislature to do something about the
Planning Act. And I said, yeah, forget it. Do it in
your own charter. Do it at home. If you can't do it at
home, don't expect the legislature to do it for
you. You've got all the power of home rule
authority to do it just like it happened in
Florida. And don't worry about it. Don't wait for
the state legislature, rural dominated, real
estate dominated, bank dominated, to give you
planning mandates. Our manager and our counsel
said, we'll think about doing that. Well, that
convinced me if I'm going to do one more stint in the
public sector, what better way than to pull it off
in the middle of Texas. And that was kind of the
challenge. Okay, that's very interesting that
that challenge, and then of course it worked out.
The question is open until we finish. When you were
in Florida... Did you know Dan O'Connell? Oh, yes.
Well, Dan and I are pretty good friends. Oh. And we
knew each other when he, first of all, had wondered
if he would pursue a PhD at Texas A&M or University
of Washington. Right. Well, you know what
happened with the situation at University of
Washington, and I, of course, had known him up
there, too, and I could tell he was getting
disenchanted. And then we kept in correspondence
after he returned to Florida. And I guess he's
still in the governor's office. Yeah, should be
figuring out what he's doing himself since the
governor's going to the Senate. I've been meaning
to try to call him and find out what's going on. We
keep in contact every three or four months. He's a
very good man. If you talk to him before I do, say
hello. He sure is. He's very inventive and got lots
of energy. As a matter of fact, we got Dan in here.
That's right. He mentioned he was coming. I got
here in September. Duncan got here in August. We
were faced with this big Northwest plan fiasco
here. And in the process of doing that plan, we were
also working behind the scenes with the council,
who said, all right, take a shot at giving us a
mandatory charter. And we got Dan O'Connell in
here as a consultant. to do a big report, give them
the legislative legal bases for doing these kinds
of things, and to draft our charter. And we did that
in about a 45-day period, put it on the, gave it to
the council, had one hearing, they didn't even
know what they were reading, put it on with 18 other
items on the referendum, and it passed by 68%.